The knight’s tour is a special case of a depth first search where the goal is to create the deepest depth first tree, without any branches. The more general depth first search is actually easier. Its goal is to search as deeply as possible, connecting as many nodes in the graph as possible and branching where necessary.

It is even possible that a depth first search will create more than one tree. When the depth first search algorithm creates a group of trees we call this a depth first forest. As with the breadth first search our depth first search makes use of predecessor links to construct the tree. In addition, the depth first search will make use of two additional instance variables in the Vertex class. The new instance variables are the discovery and finish times. The discovery time tracks the number of steps in the algorithm before a vertex is first encountered. The finish time is the number of steps in the algorithm before a vertex is colored black. As we will see after looking at the algorithm, the discovery and finish times of the nodes provide some interesting properties we can use in later algorithms.

The code for our depth first search is shown in Listing 5. Since the two functions dfs and its helper dfsvisit use a variable to keep track of the time across calls to dfsvisit we chose to implement the code as methods of a class that inherits from the Graph class. This implementation extends the graph class by adding a time instance variable and the two methods dfs and dfsvisit. Looking at line 11 you will notice that the dfs method iterates over all of the vertices in the graph calling dfsvisit on the nodes that are white. The reason we iterate over all the nodes, rather than simply searching from a chosen starting node, is to make sure that all nodes in the graph are considered and that no vertices are left out of the depth first forest. It may look unusual to see the statement for aVertex in self, but remember that in this case self is an instance of the DFSGraph class, and iterating over all the vertices in an instance of a graph is a natural thing to do.

